---
title: The Great Filter
layout: post
in_navigation: true
---

Here's a scary concept: *The Great Filter*. It's a response to the fact that we -- as a civilization -- have yet to see evidence of intelligent life outside of our home planet.

The theory says that given the vastness of space -- the unimaginable number of planets and stars -- there must be some big obstacle that prevents intelligent life from evolving to galactic civilization.

Perhaps we, as humans, have moved beyond the great filter. Maybe we are not. If we're past it, perhaps the filter was having a habitable planet (perhaps most planets are simply not made of the right materials). It could be the evolution to multi-cellular life. It could be sexual reproduction. Maybe one of these things is really hard.

The scary part is the chance that the great filter is yet to come. That would mean that our civilization has an uphill battle ahead of it.

An example milestone that we have yet to hit could be establishing a multi-planet civilization. Perhaps it's really hard organize and collaborate across the vastness of a solar system. Perhaps rogue gamma bursts wipe out swaths of life in a single go -- and happen often enough that life is unlikely to make it beyond the planetary stage. Perhaps faster-than-light travel does not exist, making intersystem travel realistically impossible.

I think it's easier to argue that the filter is ahead of us and not behind us. We, as a species, are complex. And we evolve. But our evolution is slow and our technology evolves faster than us.

Because of this, I think we'll get to the point where our technology is so complex that no one member of our species could possibly hope to understand the massive amounts of state encoded in our machines or our political structure. At our current state -- how many people know how to build a cell phone? It's only a minuscule percentage of our population. Now imagine the same question asked for a interplanetary spaceship.

Our brains, and our ability to conceptualize the state of the world around us would have to grow leaps-and-bounds in order to make a multi-planet civilization work.

*(To be continued)*
